What is MongoDB
MongoDB is a popular NoSQL database that stores data in flexible, JSON-like documents. Unlike traditional relational databases, it uses a dynamic schema, making it highly scalable and ideal for modern applications, especially when paired with Node.js.

Steps to Install MongoDB
Step 1: Open Official Website
Open your web browser and visit the MongoDB Download Center: https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community

Step 2: Download MongoDB Community Server
On the website, ensure Community Server is selected. Choose the latest version, your OS (Windows, macOS, or Linux), and select the MSI (Windows) or TGZ/brew (macOS/Linux) package. Click Download.

Step 3: Install MongoDB
Windows: * Run the .msi file.

Choose "Complete" setup type.

Select "Run service as Network Service user" (this keeps MongoDB running in the background).

Ensure "Install MongoDB Compass" is checked (this gives you a GUI to see your data). Click Install.

macOS (using Homebrew):

Open Terminal and run: brew tap mongodb/brew

Then run: brew install mongodb-community

Linux (Ubuntu):

Import the public key and create the list file (refer to official docs for your specific version).

Run: sudo apt update

Run: sudo apt install -y mongodb-org

Step 4: Set Environment Variables (Windows Only)
To run MongoDB from any command prompt:

Copy the path to the bin folder (usually C:\Program Files\MongoDB\Server\7.0\bin).

Search for "Edit the system environment variables" in Windows.

Click Environment Variables > Select Path > Click Edit > New > Paste the path and click OK.

Step 5: Verify MongoDB Installation
Open a new Command Prompt / Terminal and run:

mongod --version

mongosh (This opens the MongoDB Shell)

If you see the version number and the test> prompt, MongoDB is ready.

Step 6: Installation Completed
MongoDB is now installed. You can use MongoDB Compass (the desktop app) to interact with your database visually or use the shell for command-line operations.

Running MongoDB (Service and Shell)
Start the Service (Windows): It usually starts automatically. If not, open "Services," find MongoDB Server, and click Start.

Start the Service (macOS/Linux): * brew services start mongodb-community (macOS)

sudo systemctl start mongod (Linux)

Access the Database:

Type mongosh in your terminal to enter the shell.

To see your databases, type: show dbs

To exit the shell, type: exit

Connect via Node.js: Use the connection string: mongodb://localhost:27017
